Good afternoon.
Welcome to the last session
of the last day of WWDC.
Are your brains full?
[Transcript missing]
The big thing for us is that
it's the basis for new features.
We have cleaned this up and built
it with a mind to the future,
and we're going to be talking
a little bit about some of the
things we're building on top of it.
After I've talked about all that,
Andrew is going to talk to you about the
new linker that has really opened the
floodgates to make all of this possible.
So what we're going to cover in general
order is the overt changes to the
tools and to KEXT management support
that you deal with as a developer,
the internal changes to the system that
hopefully won't affect you too much,
the features we have
planned coming along,
and then the benefits of the new linker.
Again, Andrew will cover that.
We've been repeating this in every
presentation dealing with KEXTs.
iPhone does not use loadable KEXTs,
so if you came here for that, sorry.
The technology framework we're
using is in three general chunks,
and then the linker
underneath all of that.
Userspace KEXTs management
is the tool such as kextload,
kextd, and the others that you use as a
developer and that the system uses.
There's also the specification
for KEXTs bundles themselves.
We're going to go into
a few changes there,
and then we're going to talk about
how the kernel manages KEXTs.
And again, Andrew will cover the
KEXTs linker itself in detail.
Now, I do want to say this stuff is
very much in development right now.
We have all of the pieces working.
Everything is pretty much
feature compatible with Leopard.
Your KEXTs should work
as they have before.
But some of the new features I'm
talking about are not here yet.
We've laid the groundwork for them,
but we haven't implemented them all yet.
And some aspects that were there
on Leopard are only partially
re-implemented or ported.
The caching schemes
are in flux right now,
for example.
And the logging, while improved,
is only partial.
There are some things that
we need to add there yet.
So, let's go ahead and get started.
As a brief overview,
this is more of a Delta talk.
It's not an introduction,
but I'll go through some of the basics.
A KEXT is a driver for the
kernel for hardware devices,
or it's a file system or network plug-in.
It's packaged as a bundle on disk.
If you're not familiar with that,
we wrap individual files and resources
under a directory that the finder
treats as a single file to users.
And we use that to organize the
data and resources that we use.
For use of KEXTs, what we do is,
our job is to load the executable
from disk into the running kernel.
So what we do is we resolve
dependencies on the families that
Dean talked about in his earlier talk.
We figure out where the KEXT is
going to be in the kernel,
relocate that, locate its code in the
kernel's address space,
and then execute the
start point of the KEXT.
We also handle unloading,
as well as things like analyzing,
developing, and debugging KEXTs.
So you use our tools to
generate symbols for debugging.
We've got a tool that will figure
out what your library should be that
you're going to need to link against,
and so on.
This is not about the runtime.
This is not about writing your KEXT code.
It's not about the IOCit.
It's not about the kernel calls.
That's all handled through the framework.
Thank you.
Now,
to get into the actual details of things,
we've made some changes to
user-space KEXT management,
and the big one is that we're
splitting KEXT load out.
If you're not familiar
with these tools yet,
KEXT load is the tool you use
to explicitly load a KEXT.
Most I/O Kit KEXTs automatically
load as devices appear,
and they unload as devices disappear.
But if you want to force a KEXT to load,
or if it's a non-Iokit KEXT,
KEXT load is the tool you use.
And up until SnowLeopard,
it has been the single tool
for loading a KEXT for both
deployment and development purposes.
We're going to split those out for
SnowLeopard so that we can simplify
KEXT load and reduce it down to just
the essentials that it needs to do.
And to that end, it's going to accept
just these basic options.
You can still specify
a KEXT by bundle ID.
You can still list a dependency
explicitly on the command line that
isn't in the extensions folder.
And you can still specify a
whole folder of additional KEXTs.
But you won't be able to say,
for example,
don't load a KEXT by bundle ID.
You won't look in the
system folder at all,
because that's really a developer thing.
Of course, all of the basic options for
verbose logging and whatnot
are going to be there.
Right now on SnowLeopard,
if you run KEXT load with the
additional developer options,
it will work as it did on Leopard.
But you're going to get a notice
saying that it's splitting and
that you should use the new tool,
which is called KEXT util.
And I'll be talking about
that in just a second.
Our ultimate goal here is to
reduce KEXT load to a very thin
wrapper that will just message
kexty with the load arguments.
And kexty, the ongoing daemon,
that the kernel talks to to handle
all sorts of things related to KEXTs,
will handle the load operation
itself by talking to the kernel.
As I mentioned, for developer loading,
we're replacing kextload with
a new tool called kextutil.
And it's basically going to
be today's kextload with a
few extra new options now.
And it's going to be less
fussy about those options.
If you have ever wanted to
generate symbols for your
KEXT and groaned as you typed in,
you know,
dash A with all of the addresses for
every library that you don't care about,
you're not going to
have to do that anymore.
You can just say, give me the symbols for
this KEXT at this address,
and it will just skip generating
symbols for all the rest.
Similarly, if you are in a batch
or interactive mode,
if you've used this tool,
kextload would ask you for the load
address of every library up to your KEXT.
And if you failed to
enter that or skipped it,
it would just abort.
Now it will just make up an address,
do the link,
and then not write out that file,
and it will only give you
the files that you want.
In general,
it's going to be less pedantic
about duplicated options,
so that if you specify something twice,
it won't bomb out,
it will just print a warning,
and you'll be able to
continue with your work.
There are two big new options to mention.
We finally have a dash-arch flag,
so you can generate symbols
across architecture.
PPC-R386-X86-64.
And Andrew's going to
talk about this later,
but because the linker
layout has changed,
if you want to do symbols for
an older release of the OS,
you'll need to specify the
dash-legacy layout flag.
We're looking into ways
to make that automatic.
I will point out that some
behavior that you may be used to,
especially in interactive mode,
is different.
So if you specify interactive mode,
the old KEXT load would say,
do you want to load the KEXT,
do you want to start the KEXT,
do you want to send personalities?
It's actually going to load
them all regardless now.
And then it will say,
do you want to start the KEXT,
because really that's the
only part that matters.
We are looking into
whether that's appropriate,
but it's probably going
to work out just fine.
Overall,
we are updating all of the KEXT tools.
We're using the new,
more efficient code base to build them.
We're adding long options to all of
them so that you'll be a little bit less
confused over single-letter options that
have opposite meanings from tool to tool,
which is the case for a few of them.
We're also cleaning up the
behavior so that when you
run these tools on your KEXT,
it won't do a whole bunch of background
operations on every other KEXT it
encounters and log about all of that.
It will just work on your
KEXT and log about your KEXT,
just the stuff you care about.
Of course, we've got support for the
64-bit kernel and KEXTs,
and again, operation for a specified
architecture with these tools.
They're not all ported yet.
Right now we've got
these six tools ported.
kextload, of course, kextunload,
which is a little bit cleaned up.
You might want to read the man
page of that again because some
of the options behave a little
bit differently than you thought.
kexty is ported,
not something you generally deal with.
And kextool,
which is the replacement for kextload.
kextstat has been updated
to work on running on top of
both 32- and 64-bit kernels.
And the kextlib command is also ported.
So that lets you find out what
libraries you need to declare.
Not yet ported,
but hopefully will be there very soon,
are the kextfind utility, kextcache,
and mkextunpack.
As I mentioned earlier,
the caching schemes are
still being worked out.
Speaking of caching schemes,
if you're working with KEXTs on
systems from Leopard and prior,
the good news is that
nothing has changed.
You're going to install
your KEXTs atomically into
the extensions folder,
and then we'll notice that,
or if you touch the extensions folder,
we're going to notice that and just
rebuild the caches automatically.
The truth, of course,
is that everything is
changing since Leopard.
So if you're doing any touching
of the individual cache files,
you probably want to
move to the new model.
Specifically,
we're moving all of the cache files
into system library caches where
they should have been all along.
There's not going to be
any more plist cache.
Some of you may have run into problems
with that getting a little bit out of
sync and having to manually delete that.
We're hoping that you're
never going to see that again.
We're moving to a small cache
that's just going to have identifier
version and path so that we can look
up KEXTs by bundle ID and get to
their bundle on disk very quickly.
And then we're going to have a
separate cache for IOCit personalities.
So we're going to have a separate
cache for IOCit personalities.
Other changes coming along.
And this is the big one.
We're going to be talking about it a
little bit more in detail as we go along.
SnowLeopard KEXT loads are now atomic
between the user and kernel space.
If you've ever looked into any of the
code or have dealt with these problems,
the operation of loading a KEXT from
user space on Leopard and prior involves
many MIG calls down to the kernel for
each KEXT in the dependency graph.
We had to allocate the memory in
the kernel to get the link address,
and then we had to do
the link in user space,
and then copy the
relocated executable down,
and then set up all of the
relationships between the dependencies,
and each of those is a MIG call.
What we're doing now is we're going to be
using the MIG call to do the same thing.
We're going to roll up that entire
load graph into a Mach message,
send it down to the kernel,
and it's going to do all of that
work down in the kernel now.
That said,
kextutil is still going to allow
for KEXTs not to be started or for
personalities not to be sent when
you do that developer load operation,
so that you'll be able to set
up debug points and whatnot
for your start routines,
and this is particularly
important for non-IO kit KEXTs.
In addition,
there's no more Mach.sim file.
The kernel's link state is
maintained in kernel memory.
We can do everything
down in the kernel now,
so we don't have to
write things out on disk,
and we don't have to wonder which
kernel we're actually linking against.
Also, the UUID checks,
you may have seen warnings about
if you've been developing KEXTs and
replaced families or your own KEXT.
You may have seen warnings
saying you can't load because
a different UUID is loaded.
We actually won't have
to do that anymore,
because the libraries in the
KEXT will also have their link state.
We're going to talk about that more.
So it will be possible to load against
a dependency that's changed on disk.
I want to repeat that.
If you update a family on disk,
or someone runs a software update,
or if you have a KEXT that does that,
you used to have to reboot because we
lost the executable on disk that we
needed to do the link in user land.
Since that's all done in the kernel now,
we can continue to load KEXTs as
long as they're compatible
without forcing a reboot.
The UUID is still there in
KEXTs built with the new tools.
We may be using it for other purposes.
It does have its uses,
but we don't have to do it
for this particular purpose.
Now we're going to get into
some upcoming features.
One of the little ones that I've been
hoping to do pretty soon is doing
some enhancements to KEXT stats.
So you can list additional properties,
perhaps including that UUID,
so you can verify that the KEXT you're
debugging is the one you have
on disk and you're working with,
and not have to constantly
update the version.
We might also add the ability to list the
OS object classes that your KEXT defines,
or that an arbitrary KEXT defines,
just to see which classes are where.
In addition,
we're hoping to add a C API at long
last for KEXT loading and unloading.
It will be an RPC to kexty,
and it will take care of
that communication process.
So you will not have to fork
and exec KEXT load just to load
a KEXT from your application.
We're probably going to have the same
authentication requirements for kextload,
but we're looking into ways to do that.
So your process will have to be running
as root or probably an admin user,
but we're going to look into how
relaxed we can be about that and
what sorts of verification we can do.
And then finally, much more tentatively,
since we have to talk to
another team about this,
we're hoping to integrate
things with the dev tools more.
For example,
it really should be possible from
GDB to just have it figure out
the addresses of the loaded KEXTs,
generate the symbols for you,
and automatically load them.
We really want this to be possible,
so we're going to talk to
the dev tools team and see if
we can have something added.
For now, what you'll do is you'll run
kextutil-s and use the addkext
command as you currently do.
And similarly,
what we would like for Xcode is to
have it automatically generate your
OS bundle libraries declaration so that
you don't have to go rooting through
headers to figure out which libraries.
Now back in Leopard,
I introduced the kextlibs command,
so you can run that on an arbitrary KEXT.
It ignores the OS bundle libraries
property and actually goes and
looks in every library for symbols
that match your undefined symbols,
and it prints a list of those.
It tells you which ones
occur in multiple KEXTs,
and you'll have to make a decision there.
But if everything works out and you
really don't have any conflicts,
you can just run kextlibs-xml,
pipe it to pbcopy,
and then paste it into your plist.
That's what you can do for now.
On to KEXT bundles,
the changes to the format,
in particular the info dictionaries,
we have added one big feature that is
actually there in SnowLeopard right now,
and that is
architecture-specific properties.
So if you have to link against different
libraries on x86-64 versus i386 or PPC,
you'll just tag on the architecture
to the end of the property,
right here as the example,
os-bundle-libraries under bar x86-64.
When we're linking your
KEXT for that architecture,
and we need to look up the
os-bundle-libraries property,
we will tag on that architecture,
look that up, and if it exists,
we'll use it.
If it doesn't, we'll fall back to the
base key and use that.
So that's a technique you may be
able to use to make your KEXT more
compatible across some releases.
As I mentioned,
we're going to look up that
base key so you can use that for
backward compatibility by adding
an architecture-specific property
for some specific thing that you
know will only work on SnowLeopard,
and then the base key for the
architecture-specific property.
The base key will then be used
for Leopard and prior releases.
This is good for any top-level property
except the CFBundle properties and,
of course, for os-kernel resources.
That's reserved for system KEXTs.
And because this is an
addition specific to KEXTs,
you will never see this used by CFBundle.
This is something we only
do internally in our stuff.
Speaking of libraries, for 32-bit KEXTs,
things haven't changed too much.
OS bundle libraries,
for those who don't know,
is the list of KEXTs that you need to
link against in order to load properly.
We haven't really changed
those for SnowLeopard.
The supported 32-bit
KPIs have not changed.
We have a new link model that
includes every symbol in the kernel,
but that's the old link model,
and we're still supporting it
on SnowLeopard for 32-bit KEXTs.
Unsupported KPI has had
some symbols removed.
They are unsupported,
and we have removed some,
and we're adding a KPI,
com.apple.kpi.private.
This has symbols that aren't
available for third-party KEXTs,
and you really shouldn't use them.
Thank you.
and Andrew Myrick are going to be
working on the kernel extension.
We're going to be enforcing that
private ability at some point,
so don't use that.
In 64-bit land,
there has been some KPI cleanup,
which you've probably seen if
you've been to the earlier talks.
More specifically,
coms.apple.kernelstar is not there.
This is really an old compatibility
link model that Andrew will
probably talk about a little bit.
It's not there, and in fact,
due to a bug in the seed,
if you link against them,
you're actually going to get
a really quick kernel panic.
So make sure you update your OS bundle
libraries before you port to 64-bit.
Also, coms.apple.kpi.unsupported,
not there anymore,
and coms.apple.kpi.private,
not available.
If you were here before lunch,
you saw Jay Towsley talk about the
porting ability for various things,
and then there was also session 338,
the whole kernel architecture
and kernel extension transition.
Another feature that
we're looking into adding,
not there yet,
but we have had some requests for this,
so we're going to look into it.
Resource files for KEXTs,
specifically for things
like device firmware.
Any large thing that you need
to get and download to a device,
but then don't need to keep
around in kernel memory,
this is the target audience for that.
Right now, if you want to do downloadable
firmware or similar things,
you either have to embed it in
your IOCit driver personality,
which means it remains resident in
kernel-wired memory pretty much forever,
or you have to do some rendezvous
with a user space process,
both of which are kind of painful.
So what we're going to do is we're going
to support CF Bundle's resource feature,
and your KEXT in the
kernel will be able to say,
get me the resource with this name.
And what we're going to do is either
get it immediately at boot time,
we'll have some way of
marking these with a property,
something like OS Bundle required,
which you use to specify
KEXT needed at boot time.
If you do that, you'll name some
resources that are needed.
The booter will copy them into memory.
The mkext format will also include those.
And then they'll be available
immediately if you request them by name.
Past early boot,
those things are going to be flushed
from memory to save kernel-wired memory.
And if you request them,
that request will be routed up to kexty,
and that may be synchronous
or asynchronous.
We're still looking into that.
All that said,
these are static resource files.
These are part of your bundle.
They should be read-only.
They will be cached,
and you shouldn't be using
them for configuration.
They're not a place to store preferences.
on to the kernel itself.
This is where everything really happens.
The big news is that kernel is now really
properly claiming ownership of KEXTs.
It used to be sort of a split
duty between the kernel and
the user space KEXT framework.
Now all KEXTs are going to be
linked and loaded inside the kernel.
The user space tools just take
the raw executables and plists
and whatever else might be needed,
build up that dependency graph,
and send that down to the
kernel in one message.
As I mentioned earlier,
it's going to be an atomic
operation with regard to user space.
It's one call.
Library KEXTs maintain some
state down in the kernel that
allows further links to happen.
The relocated executable
itself isn't quite enough,
so there's going to be a little
bit of extra memory we keep,
but we're going to put it
in pageable memory so that
we're not taxing the system.
And as I mentioned before,
it will now be possible to update
a library on disk and still link
against the loaded old version
because we have that link state.
If the new KEXT that you're loading
is compatible with that library,
then everything will just work.
[Transcript missing]
On to features again.
In the kernel, what we're hoping to do is
take care of auto-unload,
and in particular for this instance,
if any of you have ever tried to
write a non-IoKit KEXT that uses C++,
and particularly uses libcurrent C++,
you've probably run into problems.
And one of the reasons for that is that
the automatic unload mechanism used by
I/O Kit is pretty much predicated on
the presence of any OS object subclass.
So what we're doing now is we're
hoping to make it safer to use
libcurrent C++ on SnowLeopard
in that when a KEXT gets loaded,
we're going to look for subclasses
of iOS service rather than OS object,
and only if that's the
case do we mark the KEXT as
eligible for automatic unload.
Also, very few of you have ever
probably run into this,
but the stop routine for the KEXT,
this is not a driver stop function,
but this is the stop routine
for the KEXT as a whole.
We're going to call that now.
I/O Kit KEXTs don't have a stop routine,
so the automatic unload mechanism
for I/O Kit KEXTs would just
unload them from memory.
We're going to call that stop
routine to do a clean shutdown,
and then everything should work fine.
None of this should affect I/O Kit KEXTs,
so if this doesn't apply to you,
you can pretty much
forget the whole slide.
This is another big one.
Internal for now,
but this is coming along.
We have a class in libkern
now called OS KEXT,
and this is the new thing that manages
loaded copies of KEXT bundles from disk.
It reads KEXTs from the booter
data or from the mkexts at boot
time and builds up an internal
database of which KEXTs are available
and fields the requests to load,
start, stop,
and unload at boot time as well as later.
It tracks the defined OS object
subclasses via OS metaclass.
This all used to be done in OS metaclass,
but we're moving the bits of that
that are proper into OS KEXT.
It also takes care of adding
and removing personalities
into and out of the IO catalog.
Most of this is internal detail
that shouldn't affect you.
But it's the basis for
upcoming new features.
It's the bottom slide there.
And it provides the services.
to the user space
KEXT system and the kernel,
as well as to running KEXTs.
We're hoping to add some functions
to this class and make them
available to you so that you can,
for example, in your running code, say,
my KEXT to do something.
And getting the resource file is
going to be one of those things.
Also for non-IoK KEXTs,
we're looking into actually
enabling automatic unload.
Rather than preventing it,
we want to make it possible to do
in a way that makes sense for you
so that when your KEXT that is not
an Iok KEXT is no longer needed,
it can be cleanly unloaded
automatically without you having
to call KEXT unload in user space.
The way we're going to do this is
we're going to have an opt-in ref
count on the underlying OS KEXT.
So when you call the first retain,
your KEXT immediately becomes
eligible for automatic unload
when that retain count hits zero.
Every now and again,
there's going to be a
sweep of the loaded KEXT,
and anything that is eligible and has a
zero ref count will be unloaded cleanly.
We're also considering
automatic load for KEXTs.
We've had some requests from people
writing file system plugins and
network kernel extensions for some
kind of automatic load mechanism,
and we're talking to you.
If you want to talk more about that,
definitely come see
us after this session.
We don't know that it's gonna
happen because the requirements
so far have been really vague,
but if we can nail down something
really concrete that will work
across a wide variety of KEXTs,
that's what we're gonna do.
Also, the kunk execute thing or
facility that some of you may be
using is going to be replaced.
It's never been properly
supported for quite some time,
rather.
So we're looking into a new mechanism
based on OS KEXT that will allow
you to request a user space program
to be run by an absolute path or
a path within your KEXT bundle.
So you'll be able to maybe launch a
daemon or run some kind of utility or
fire up a GUI config tool of some kind.
The request will be
routed through Kexting,
executed in user land.
We're probably going to allow that
to be synchronous or asynchronous,
depending on what your needs are,
but we're still evaluating the
security considerations of that,
so it's not there yet.
We don't have any plans to
replace Kunk user notification.
If you want to present some kind of
user dialogue or alert from the kernel,
you'll run the new action
request and just have a program
that puts that panel up.
And we're going to get into the
details of the linker now with Andrew.
There you go.
Hello, everyone.
Hope you're having fun.
My name is Andrew Myrick,
and I am the KEXT linker engineer.
And as a little sidebar
before we get started,
this started for me a
couple of years ago.
In the summer of 2006,
I was actually a bright-eyed and
bushy-tailed intern working for Apple,
who thought, hey, need a new KEXT linker.
That sure sounds like fun.
Well, while fun is only one of
many words I would use to
describe the kernel linker,
I'm very happy to announce that we're
bringing a new KEXT linker to SnowLeopard
as part of the new KEXT management stack.
So first a little background.
What is a KEXT linker?
Well, the KEXT linker is the utility
in the kernel that takes kernel
extensions and binds them into
the kernel's address space.
Kernel extensions are just binary
kernel plug-ins that live in the kernel
address space and interact with the
core kernel and other kernel extensions.
The KEXT linker's job is to
resolve references to those
kernel functions and interfaces,
resolve references to other KEXTs,
export the KEXT functions for
use by other kernel extensions,
and then also provide binary
compatibility for kernel extensions
written for older OS X systems.
[Transcript missing]
To go a little more into the details
of the limitations caused by KLD,
well, KLD is pretty heavyweight.
It's designed to do a whole
slew of things in user space,
like link dynamic and static libraries,
many things that we
don't need in the kernel.
As I mentioned,
it doesn't clean up its memory.
It has to relink all of the
KEXT dependencies before
it can link an actual KEXT,
so it redoes a lot of work.
And we have this external Vtable patcher,
this external module that takes
care of our binary compatibility.
Finally, LD and KLD had conflicting
development directions.
In the kernel,
we want to add certain features
for kernel linking that aren't
necessarily applicable to user space.
And as I already mentioned,
LD had a lot of features that we
just didn't need in the kernel.
Trying to reconcile those diverging
directions made it difficult to
get all the new things into the
kernel that we wanted to add.
So we have KLD and KXLD.
One of our biggest goals
for KXLD was performance.
The old kernel linker had to go
back to disk every time it needed
to relink because it had to go
and fetch all of the dependencies.
We wanted to avoid that.
We wanted to avoid having
to relink old KEXTs at all.
So the way we did this is with
something we call a link state object.
The link state object is a piece of
intermediate link data that tracks
all of the symbols and functions
that a kernel extension exports.
It also keeps track of all of the
publicly accessible V tables that
are required by its dependent kernel
extensions for binary compatibility.
These link state objects are stored
in pageable memory so that they
don't use any wired kernel resources,
and they allow us to link
a single KEXT only once.
We then cache those link state objects
in the kernel as pageable memory
away from the rest of the system so
that when we need to link a new KEXT,
we can pull them up
and link very quickly.
To illustrate this, let's take a look at
how this actually works.
The kernel linker starts out by
just taking in a KEXT and adding
in all of these pageable link state
object files that that KEXT needs
to be linked into the kernel.
This linker then generates
a new link state object,
exporting that kext's public
functions and V tables,
and adds that to the pool of
pageable link state objects.
It then also exports the
relocated KEXT binary,
which it then injects and initializes
in the kernel's address space,
taking care of all of the linking.
So let's talk about what this means.
Did we achieve our goal of
getting high performance?
Well, I can certainly say that the link
state object and the algorithms
we were able to design around it
greatly improved linking performance.
First of all,
just looking at memory reuse,
we were actually able to
reuse a lot of memory.
The old linker allocated and freed
roughly 90 megabytes on startup,
and unoptimized KXLE is
already down to 60.
We hope to get that down to about 15.
But the real performance gains
came in actual linking time.
ATI Radion X2000 KEXT is a
kernel extension that drives
the latest graphics cards.
The old linker took 210
milliseconds to link that KEXT.
KXLE takes only 25 milliseconds.
So what does all this
mean for you developers?
Well, first of all,
to make sure that we link
kernel extensions the way we
can rely on in the future,
we've changed the KEXT memory layout.
In the past,
kernel extensions were laid out just as
they were in their Mako object files,
which is just one section, one segment,
right after the other.
In the new model,
we now separate all of the
segments into page-aligned segments
as they originally intended,
which allows us to implement proper
VM protections on those segments.
This means we can write
protect the text segments,
execute protect the data segments,
and in general provide better security.
We haven't enabled this
yet on SnowLeopard,
but it will be there in the GM.
Now this means that symbol
generation has changed,
because the layout of kernel
extensions has changed.
So to generate symbols for older systems,
for Leopard and earlier systems,
we've added a flag to
kextutil called legacy layout,
which will emulate the old kernel
extension layout for generating
symbols for those older systems.
We're looking at automatically
detecting this at runtime
based on the kernel's version,
but we're not there yet.
An important note is that Leopard
systems in earlier cannot generate
symbols for SnowLeopard systems.
It's important to keep in mind,
if you need symbols for
a SnowLeopard system,
use a SnowLeopard system
to get those symbols.
Another thing that Nik already
mentioned is cross-architecture linking.
SnowLeopard can link for any
architecture that OS X runs on.
PowerPC is even supported,
even though the seed
doesn't support PowerPC.
So if you have a PowerPC system
running Leopard earlier,
just make sure you use legacy layout
to get the right symbol generation.
This applies to both symbol
generation and when the
pre-linked kernel comes along,
it'll apply to that too.
So any SnowLeopard system,
32-bit or 64-bit,
will be able to generate
symbols for any other.
So what else are we looking at?
Well, we know a lot of you
have wanted weak linking.
And weak linking is pretty tricky,
especially thinking about C++, V tables,
how all that works.
But we really want to get weak
linking in at least for C symbols.
We're going to try and do
this in as seamless a way as
possible as user space does,
using existing GCC attributes,
specifically the weak import attribute.
Add this to our headers,
much the way that the availability
macros in user space work.
Then when you need to access and find
out if a symbol is ready to be used,
if it's available at runtime,
we'll have a function similar
to what's listed up here,
OSMetaClassIsWeeklyDefined,
which will return null
if it doesn't exist,
and the symbol's address if it does.
We'll also try and add some
logic for unresolved weak symbol
dereferences so that not only-- so
instead of just getting a panic,
you'll get a panic that says,
this KEXT accessed this symbol,
and it wasn't-- it was weakly
defined but unresolved.
Specifically,
we're really looking for some feedback
on what you all want to weak link.
So if you have some suggestions,
some things that you're
really looking for,
please contact us afterwards.
There will be an email address I'll put
up shortly with information of how to
get in touch with us about weak linking.
Another feature we're looking to
add is better symbol generation,
which Nik touched on earlier.
We already have cross-architecture,
but there are a couple of other
features we're looking to add.
First is the KeepSims bootarg.
Some of you may know that if you set
KeepSims equal to 1 as a bootarg,
The system will--the kernel will
keep its symbols in memory so that
the panic that's printed on screen
will be symbolicated automatically.
And we're looking at storing the
KEXT symbols in the system as well so
that you won't just get this black hole
of functions in the kernel stack trace.
You'll actually get all
the symbols there as well.
And we're looking at integrating
that with GDB so that add KEXT would
either grab symbols from the
save symbols and keep sims,
or just call out to the new
kernel extension management
library that Nik has worked on to
generate those symbols for you.
Really, we know that 14 steps to generate
and load symbols on a system to
debug a kernel extension is a lot,
and we're just trying to cut that down.
So for more information,
you can talk to Craig Keithley.
His contact information is there.
There's also the guide,
Kernel Extension Programming Topics,
available on developer.apple.com.
Also, we've requested feedback for a
number of things in this talk,
and if you have any to give us,
you can email
kext-feedback@group.apple.com
to give us more information.
Some related sessions that
hopefully you all got to see,
but if you didn't,
you can eventually see them
through the attendee website,
was the 64-bit session,
MacOSX 64-bit Kernel Architecture and
Kernel Extension Transition,
getting started with the I/O Kit,
device drivers in MacOSX,
which is this morning,
and also maximizing platform
compatibility of I/O Kit drivers,
also this morning.
So to summarize,
we completely reworked KEXT management
for SnowLeopard in as binary of
compatible ways we possibly could.
Most of the new features that
we're bringing are opt-in,
and some,
like the new speed of the KEXT linker,
you'll just get for free.
Porting to K64 requires a few changes,
and the details are subject to change,
but in general,
we hope that this all works
pretty seamlessly for you all.
So thank you very much,
and open this up for questions.